The Right(s) to the Hybrid City and the Role of DIY Networking

Panayotis Antoniadis^1 & Ileana Apostol^2

 1. Senior Researcher, Department of Information Technology and Electrical
    Engineering, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. Email:
    panayotis.antoniadis@tik.ee.ethz.ch
 2. Senior Researcher, Department of Architecture, ETH Zurich, Zurich,
    Switzerland.

INTRODUCTION

More and more urban space becomes inherently hybrid since information and
communication technology (ICT) acts as a mediator for interactions between
people residing in close physical proximity for varied time periods, from
neighbours to passers-by and strangers in public spaces. This hybrid realm has
the capability to support novel types of communication between citizens and
local authorities. For example, authorities can share rich data sets with
citizens and application providers, and citizens are empowered to generate
useful information for authorities during their everyday activities such as in
the crowdsourcing and citizen science paradigms. Moreover, ICTs can also
provide a virtual spatial framework for e-participation and online
deliberations (e.g. Horelli, 2013; Houghton et al., 2013). Urban and community
informatics are some of the emerging interdisciplinary fields that bring
together knowledge from computer and social sciences and study the role of
technology and its design in various urban settings (see Foth 2009; Foth et
al., 2012; Gurstein, 2010).

Virtual space is increasingly becoming part of the physical material space in
cities with a digital infrastructure. Signage in public spaces that points at
specific virtual locations, using text (Internet URL addresses), 2D barcodes
and posters, or other physical artefacts may be permanent or mobile, as in the
case of the yellowchair project^1 , an art installation by Arab Jain in San
Jose, California, that encourages residents who are willing to share their
private WiFi to place a yellow chair on the public sidewalk to signal the
presence of free access to the Internet, but also to stimulate playful
interactions between strangers, such as recipe sharing. In more advanced
scenarios the physical space for public life can become the container of
virtual interactions-through the use of public interactive displays and the
flexible embodied interactions that smartphones and location-based mobile
applications enable (e.g. Farman, 2012).

However, technology can both further and hinder local communication. On the one
hand, it allows efficient asynchronous information sharing and organization
(Shirky, 2008); the creation and maintenance of multiple overlapping social
networks (Rainie & Wellman, 2012); and a more flexible self-representation and
engagement for individuals (Turkle, 1995). On the other hand, the capabilities
that make it easier to browse and filter our physical environment are also
rendering invisible "the different others", even if they may be standing next
to us (Turkle, 2012; Wilken, 2010; Crawford, 2008).

At the same time, the use of ICTs is subject to various types of digital
divides and their design requires specialized knowledge, shifting the power
balance in favour of the hosting companies-usually large corporations-and their
programmers (Mansell, 2012). But most importantly, these corporations freely
acquire tremendous amounts of data that generate invaluable knowledge regarding
human behaviour in ICT-mediated communications, which is often used to achieve
private, commercial objectives in ways that are not transparent to the rightful
owners of this information (e.g. Tufekci 2014).

This means that the simple existence of ICTs is not sufficient to guarantee to
citizens their rights to the hybrid city. It is the actual design of the
evolving hybrid urban spaces, and the responsible use of generated digital
information that will determine whether ICT's promises for increased civic
engagement, participation, and community building will be materialized. In the
following research note we make an initial effort to formulate an updated
version of the "right to the city" concept that takes into account the complex
hybrid urban environments created through the contemporary uses of ICTs. We
then propose a specific application concept that would facilitate information
sharing between strangers in the city and analyze the unique characteristics of
wireless technology that render the possibility of DIY (do-it-yourself)
networking a very attractive alternative for such local interactions. We posit
that an appropriate combination of user-owned wireless networks and open source
social software can make a difference in today's "globalized" Internet by
enabling citizens to develop their own local solutions, and claim their right
to access, representation, participation and ownership in the hybrid city.

THE RIGHT(S) TO THE HYBRID CITY

The phrase "the right to the city", coined by Henri Lefebvre in 1968, is
subject today to various definitions and interpretations, and according to
Christian Schmid (2012), "often serves just as a kind of conceptional umbrella
for all types of political and social demands that generally address the
problems arising in urban areas today" (42). Part of the confusion is due to
the complexity of the "city" or urban concept itself, considering that in the
last decades urban space has been the product of "planetary urbanization"
processes (Lefebvre, 2003; Brenner & Schmid, 2011); at the confluence between
the "space of places" and the "space of flows" (Castells, 2005); and
manifesting in everyday life practices as an interplay between conceptual,
material and lived space (Lefebvre, 1991).

Within this complexity in the understandings of urban space we identify the
following important individual rights that are part of the "right to the city"
concept, and will help us draw useful analogies between physical and virtual
spaces:

 1. The right to access the core resources of the city;
 2. The right to be represented, to be part of the collective identity;
 3. The right to participate in important decisions, such as urban policies and
    design;
 4. The right to ownership of the urban commons, which refers to commonly held
    property, and use, stewardship and management in common of the available
    and produced resources.

This idea of a right to ownership of urban spaces, for instance, has been
stressed by urban planning theorist John Friedmann (1993, 139), who has stated
that "a city can truly be called a city only when its streets belong to the
people" (cited by Schmid, 2012). How can this and our other fundamental rights
be translated into more complex ones, such as the control of the urbanization
process or the right to self-determination? To whom should these rights be
granted, and under which political processes? These are challenging questions
that are out of the scope of this paper (for a more in depth analysis about the
"right to the city" concept, see Lefebvre, 1996; Friedmann, 1993; Harvey, 2008;
Brenner et al., 2012). Instead we choose to focus on analyzing our set of four
specific rights applied to the hybrid-digital and physical-space in the city.

A key objective at this early stage in our work is to highlight the fact that
these different fundamental rights are also conveyed-explicitly or
implicitly-to those participating at the overlaid virtual space of the hybrid
city. Today it is mostly large corporations like Google, Facebook and Twitter
that control the virtual social interactions at a global scale, but also at
localities offering, among others, "geo-social" services^2 that allow people to
connect with friends and similar others while in physical proximity (see also
Farman, 2012). Alas, to offer this service, these companies record over time
the locations of all interested parties, and store them in servers located very
far away from the actual place where these ICT-mediated "contacts" occur.

Note that even if these online social networks have been positively connected
with recent urban uprisings and political struggles for the "right to the city"
(e.g. Gezi Park in Istanbul), they are themselves highly privatized spaces.
Their owners have significant power over the design of important software
details and the management of all collected data, ranging from multimedia
content (e.g. photos and videos) to private information (e.g. location and
profile) and patterns of activity (e.g. reactions to stimulation and time spent
online). This complete lack of ownership and control of these platforms on the
users' behalf poses significant threats related to privacy, surveillance,
censorship, and manipulation, which should not be underestimated (e.g. Tufekci,
2014; Morozov, 2013).

Despite the increasing public awareness of the threats posed by the
concentration of huge amounts of private information in the hands of a few
corporations, the key questions remain open: What is a viable alternative in
terms of hardware and software? And under which participatory processes and
ownership structures can citizens appropriate the virtual space that overlays
their physical environment? In other words, which are the "virtual" versions of
participatory spatial design today and in the future?

Alternative technical solutions for the design of hybrid space do exist and can
distribute differently the power between users, administrators, and owners of
the platform; but they also have their own costs and limitations. For example,
social engines, like Ning which is a popular solution for building local online
communities, offer many options for customization and allow Internet users to
build and manage their own online social networks either individually or in
groups; but often subject to a yearly fee, especially for premium services,
while all data generated are under the control of the hosting company. The
options for participation in design are richer in the case of custom web sites
either built from scratch or based on free and open source software like Drupal
. But this flexibility comes at a cost. The complexity of implementation,
deployment, and maintenance increases, in addition to the different issues of
trust that arise. For instance, global platforms are less prone to failures and
thus are better at ensuring the reliability and security of shared information
(within the system). Moreover, there are still various intermediaries with
significant power as gatekeepers, like the Internet service and web hosting
providers, the web designer, and the local administrator of the platform.
Finally, Peer-to-Peer (P2P) online social networks like Diaspora aim to
decrease the dependence on these intermediate actors, but they further increase
the other associated costs, while their operation still depends on the public
Internet.

So, although in terms of software these alternative solutions can provide
support for citizens to claim their rights to the hybrid city, they suffer from
an inherent difficulty in attracting the required critical mass of participants
due to the aforementioned costs; especially when having to compete with global
platforms that enjoy enormous financial support and can take advantage of the
significant economies of scale.

A key objective of this research note is to draw attention to the capabilities
of wireless (WiFi) technology to provide a complementary low-cost and
local-only communication infrastructure, which can operate outside the public
Internet (see Jungnickel, 2014; Antoniadis et al., 2014). This DIY networking
option enables small organizations or even individuals to literally own the
infrastructure that supports their hybrid space, and with it all generated
digital information. In this circumstance the space for experimentation with
different forms of common ownership and appropriation of the hybrid urban space
opens significantly and allows the complete avoidance of the mediation of
global corporations and other digital intermediaries. In this way the vision of
supporting, and enhancing ownership as a "sense of belonging to a collective
place, commitment to a collective issue, and willingness to share a private
resource with the collective" (de Lange and de Waal, 2013) may be realized.^3

Moreover, in the case of local-only hybrid applications, participation in the
virtual interactions requires actual physical presence, ensured without the
disclosure of private information to third parties. We see this inherently
limited accessibility to those in physical proximity as a desirable aspect of
such technology that needs to be exploited by the corresponding software and
urban interventions. The design goal is not to replace the existing global
platforms, but rather to augment them when the envisioned communication is
indeed local in nature. Before elaborating more on the advantages of using
wireless technology to communicate in local urban contexts outside the public
Internet, the section below will describe a local application that is practical
and has both social and political implications, while illustrating a creative
combination of wireless networks, open source social software and urban
interaction design.

THE HYBRID SIDEWALK

The urban street and its sidewalks may be seen as an extension of the personal
space of city residents, analogous to the role that the vast natural landscape
plays for the countryman (Sansot, 2004). In that sense, sidewalks are physical
manifestations of a right to the city for its inhabitants, in terms of: a)
providing access and possibilities for expression and representation, b)
allowing to be present, to go about one's business freely in the midst of
fellow citizens and to participate in social exchanges and activities, and
nevertheless, c) granting ownership of the public space.

The context we discuss here is the example of social exchanges at the sidewalk
level. The mingling of passers-by is evanescent, and opened to new
possibilities. As Joseph (1984) notes, "in public spaces, the most important
relationships are those that we don't have yet!" (130). The magical universe of
the diverse and unexpected on the sidewalk creates through serendipity and
spontaneous entertainment a temporary sense of community. Hence, following a
long tradition of scholars (e.g. Simmel, 1903; Lynch, 1960; Jacobs 1961;
Goffman, 1967; Sennett, 1977; De Certeau, 1984; Whyte, 1988; Debord, 1996)
celebrating the importance of informal interactions, and for that the special
role of strolling and drifting in the city, one of the premises of our work is
that the facilitation of information sharing between citizens in informal
settings-without the intervention of mediating institutions-is of critical
importance to fostering comprehensive understandings of the lived environment
and toward the appropriation of urban space.

Therefore, the design and implementation of ICT applications in the hybrid city
ought to include the benefits of traditional sidewalks, which Jane Jacobs
praised as places for essential informal interactions between strangers that
can achieve a very delicate balance between privacy and public exposure. In her
own words:

    "The sum of such casual, public contact at a local level - most of it
    fortuitous, most of it associated with errands, all of it metered by the
    person concerned and not thrust upon him by anyone - is a feeling for the
    public identity of people, a web of public respect and trust, and a
    resource in time of personal or neighborhood need. The absence of this
    trust is a disaster to a city street. Its cultivation cannot be
    institutionalized. And above all, it implies no private commitments."

(Jacobs, 1961, 56, emphasis in original).

If carefully designed, hybrid ICT applications that enable spontaneous
information sharing between strangers can offer new ways to support the role of
the sidewalk in contemporary cities, for generating local knowledge and a sense
of belonging. This knowledge can then inform the participation of individuals
in more explicit processes, as in e-planning and online deliberation systems.
Currently in participatory processes, citizens are asked for either
quantitative data, as in the crowd sourcing and citizen science paradigms, or
for qualitative information, as in e-planning and online deliberation systems
(see Foth et al., 2012; Horelli, 2013; DeCindio & Schuler, 2012). But in
addition to asking citizens explicitly to provide information from their
personal perspective, it is of critical importance that citizens exchange
information between them in informal settings, and in ways that can increase
their environment awareness and help them build some sort of shared public
identity (see Apostol et al., 2013).

As public locations and urban neighborhoods bring strangers together, they have
the capability to stimulate various degrees of awareness of the other's
presence, condition, behavior, and actions. In many cases those in physical
proximity do not necessarily share the same interests and background, and so
their interaction and information exchanges can expose them to diversity. Yet
exposure to diversity is controlled and limited by the broad range of privately
owned spaces for public life, as well as by today's highly efficient and
personalized online tools. The good news is that in the hybrid realm, the
physical proximity offers opportunities for face-to-face encounters and common
activities (that sometimes are stimulated, and extend the superficial or
short-term online exchanges).

But how do our four aforementioned rights to the hybrid city influence the
successful deployment of a hybrid ICT application to facilitate information
sharing in the neighbourhood or in public spaces? And how can wireless
technology play an important role in this direction? Before answering these
questions we explore the concrete examples of two real life applications, which
can be seen as two extremes in terms of the rights they offer to their
participants. They are the social street movement in Italy and the RedHook WiFi
initiative in Brooklyn, NY.

In September 2013, Federico Bastiani together with local journalists and
residents of Via Fondazza, a street in the historic centre of Bologna, started
the social street movement. This movement's purpose is:

    "to promote socialization between neighbours in the same street in order to
    build relationships, to interchange needs, to share expertise and
    knowledge, to implement common interest projects, with common benefits from
    a closer social interaction. To reach this zero cost objective, without
    opening new sites or platforms, Social Street makes use of the creation of
    Facebook closed groups." (citation from website^4 )

Arguably the perception of a "zero cost" by using the freely available and
already popular Facebook platform is somewhat an illusion, since there are
important associated costs with this platform choice, many of them directly
related to our four rights.

First, participation through the social network requires access to the
Internet, agreement to its terms of service, and feeling comfortable to reveal
to neighbours private information, available through one's Facebook profile.
Therefore, the collective image produced in this localized Bologna online
environment would be at best incomplete, by excluding those that do not have a
Facebook account and/or Internet access; and it would be influenced or even
manipulated by the numerous small but important design details externally
decided by Facebook. Notice also that these details are exactly the same for
all the social streets in Italy, and for all places in the world. They include,
among many others, the presentation order of the various posts and the
moderation rights of the administrator, the level of anonymity allowed, the
permanence of the recorded information over time, and the user interface like
wording, colours and menu items. Finally, all the information generated-both
textual and visual-is recorded and owned by Facebook, and can be exploited for
commercial or other purposes, raising serious threats related to privacy,
surveillance, and censorship.

It is easy to see, of course, the important benefits of relying on popular
social networks, due to their high usability and already acquired critical mass
of users. However, there is no reason why one should not make an effort to
provide tools for citizens to build easily, and customize their local networks
and applications when these are meant to support local interactions. For
example, Jonathan Baldwin a few years ago, while being a master student at
Parsons The New School for Design in New York City, led the creation of a
small-scale community wireless network in the Red Hook neighbourhood in
Brooklyn, in collaboration with the Open Technology Institute^5 (Baldwin,
2011). The network is still in operation. In addition to shared Internet
access, it facilitates local interactions for all residents and passers-by,
requiring only access to a public or private computing device with a WiFi card
and a web browser.

This can be achieved through the use of a captive portal or splash page hosted
locally on the wireless network, a local web page visited by default by
connected devices, when a web browser is launched. In airports, hotels, or
coffee shops, such web pages welcome users before granting them access to the
Internet, sometimes requiring the creation of an account. But in this wireless
scenario, the local captive portal will in addition host interactions between
potentially anonymous users within physical proximity.

In the Brooklyn case, a participatory design process with local residents
preceded the design of all supported applications such as chatting; inquiries
regarding local bus schedules; a custom designed mapping application called
Tidepools-all of which are open source and thus subject to improvements.
Finally, the infrastructure and stored information remains under the control of
the local Red Hook Initiative (RHI), a Brooklyn non-profit focused on creating
social change through youth engagement (see: rhicenter.org). Similarly to
collective barn-raising projects or the more ubiquitous nowadays, community
gardens, these common activities offer spaces for personal encounters and
interactions in physical proximity. So, instead of relying on private ICT
platforms managed by commercial companies, there is the option to stimulate and
empower citizens to use their creativity and become the "self-appointed public
characters" (Jacobs, 1961), who can set up a local freely accessible network
and invite people in a local community to participate in an "information
sharing game" (Antoniadis & Apostol, 2013).

There are unlimited options for the design of such games that are more or less
close to our sidewalk metaphor. The types of information to be shared and the
exact framing would depend on the context, but could include simple
demographics (spoken languages, occupation, or gender); general preferences or
location-based ones (favourite places, commerce or artistic activities, books,
films, and music); multimedia material (audio, pictures, videos); opinions and
thoughts on interesting perhaps controversial questions, even sensitive
personal information since the wireless medium allows for purely anonymous
interactions. The main motivation for participation could be the outcome, the
display of the shared information which could take the form of playful or even
statistically interesting visualizations as in today's popular life-logging (or
quantified self) applications-though extended to a group of strangers in
physical proximity. At the very least, these visualizations will satisfy
feelings of curiosity about one's surroundings and could also form a basis for
more advanced interactions and the creation of a temporary community (see
Antoniadis et al, 2014). In addition to getting to know one's neighbours, we
envision applications of the sort being particularly attractive in ephemeral
situations where people co-exist with random strangers while passive or
waiting, and/or when there is limited Internet connectivity. Examples of such
situations are a long train or bus journey; a delayed or cancelled flight at
the airport, time spent in ad-hoc gatherings on a beach, at a camping site or
during public happenings like a cultural event at a public square; an
intermission at a concert or a football match (see Antoniadis, Ott, &
Passarella, 2014, 135-139).

Although the creation and maintenance of this type of local network currently
requires a high level of expertise, there are on-going efforts by various free
and open source software (FOSS) communities to make the deployment of such
networks easier for non-savvy users using off-the-shelf hardware such as a
Rasberry Pi (piratebox.cc ^6) or a portable wireless router like the TP-link
TL-MR3020 (occupyhere.org), which can cover confined public spaces like a
square, a small park, or a train wagon. For larger areas, like the Red Hook
neighbourhood, there are also efforts such as commotion.net or libre-mesh.org,
which promise to make it easier for communities to build their own wireless
mesh networks without relying on the expertise of motivated pioneers and
tech-savvy members (see Jungnikel, 2014; Gaved & Mullholand, 2008). One of the
objectives of our own nethood.org project is to extend these solutions to
become more general and less politically charged, innovation platforms-a
toolkit-, which will include a wide variety of hardware and software options to
be customized according to the specific context (see Antoniadis & Apostol,
2013).

As a first step, in this note we argue why such an objective is important. For
this, we analyze below some special characteristics of wireless technology that
can play a key role in designing hybrid sidewalks that grant to citizens their
"right to the hybrid city" and compete with similar Internet-based applications
in terms of user experiences.

DO-IT-YOURSELF NETWORKING (THINKING OUTSIDE THE INTERNET)

Wireless technology allows for the creation of low-cost communication networks,
often called wireless mesh networks or community wireless networks. Depending
on the number of their nodes they can cover geographic areas of various sizes,
ranging from a small public square or a small urban neighbourhood (Gaved &
Mullholand, 2008; Baldwin, 2011); to a small town like Leiden in the
Netherlands (van Oost et al, 2009); or large city-regions such as Barcelona (
guifi.net), Berlin (freifunk.net) and Athens (awmn.net). Most of the existing
operational wireless community networks are built by groups of tech savvy
users, and outsiders see them mainly as gateways to free Internet access
(Powell, 2011; Forlano, 2008; Sandivig 2004). However, one of the most
important qualities of these WiFi networks is that they can offer options for
communication outside the public Internet as highlighted by Antoniadis et al.
(2008). There are community wireless networks today that prioritize the
importance of local communications as the Redhook WiFi example (discussed
above); or the Air-stream wireless community in South Australia. As stressed by
the ethnographer Kat Jungnickel (2014), one of its "unique features is that it
is not built for the purpose of sharing the internet. While many community
wireless groups around the world use WiFi to provide free or low-cost access to
the internet, Air-Stream are essentially making their own version of the
internet, hence the description, 'Ournet, not the internet'". (26, emphasis in
original). But even in such cases the core communities of highly motivated and
tech savvy members hardly succeed to open up their local services beyond their
close social circles (ibid, 51-2).

Indeed, to build communities of proximity over local wireless mesh networks,
one needs to build applications of high quality that are both highly attractive
and usable, but also easy to adjust to the specific local context (i.e. what
Facebook and Twitter are not able to do given the nature of their
construction). The Redhook WiFi initiative illustrates that this is an
attainable objective, yet there is still a lot of room for improvement
especially in the areas of usability and customization. Part of our research
work aims to address the various technical, social, and scientific challenges,
which currently hinder the creation of attractive 'plug and play' solutions in
localized contexts. To achieve these objectives one needs to understand in
depth the unique characteristics offered by local wireless networks in contrast
with the public Internet. For example, the following are four such technical,
and thus objective, characteristics of a local-only community wireless network
that can be exploited by local social applications which give them a
competitive advantage over Internet-based solutions:

De facto physical proximity. All potential members of a local wireless network
are those that can see its network name, the service set identifier (SSID), in
their list of accessible WiFi networks and are in de facto physical proximity.
There is no need to disclose their physical location to a remote server (e.g.,
through GPS) or provide other proofs of proximity before using the system as in
the case of rather privacy intrusive services like NextDoor, which "requires
new members to prove that they actually live at their claimed residences,
either by allowing a one-cent transaction to be processed on a credit card tied
to the address, by having an existing neighborhood member vouch for their
identity, or by other means." (Stross, 2012).

Inclusiveness. Local wireless networks are cheap to build, and they can be
owned and maintained by local authorities, organizations, even individuals.
They can provide free access to all, including visitors and tourists who might
lack affordable access to the Internet. Moreover, local WiFi nets do not
require the installation of any application beforehand or typing a web address
on one's browser, thanks to the captive portal approach described above, and
the fact that the SSID of the local wireless network is included by default in
the list of all available SSIDs shown in one's device. This makes it very easy
to join.

Privacy and independence. All communications that take place in a local
wireless network stay in principle local. The only way for an external entity
to have direct access is either by placing on site physical devices connected
to a surveillance infrastructure, which is very costly at large scale and
difficult to remain unnoticed for long. Information leakages through individual
devices, either intentionally by malicious users or unintentionally through
software and hardware backdoors, are nevertheless possible and can never be
deterministically excluded. But depending on the level of perceived risk, local
communities can take precautions by engaging only in anonymous interactions,
deleting often the information stored, etc. In addition to the significant
psychological benefits, such as feelings of independence and playfulness, this
characteristic has become more and more important after the public awareness of
the NSA surveillance programs, uncovered by Edward Snowden, and of the
aggressive online profiling policies, more and more discussed in the popular
press (e.g. Clemons, 2013). Unlike Internet-based platforms, access to an
"offline" wireless network entails privacy threats that can be limited by
design, and which are by nature context-specific and localized, providing a
space of intimacy and relative freedom for its members.

Hybrid design. Being tangible infrastructure themselves, wireless networks can
be naturally embedded in other artefacts and urban interventions, such as a
public display, a coloured bench, a phone booth, or even a mobile kiosk, and
they can create naturally hybrid spaces that encourage ephemeral participation
and playful engagement (see Antoniadis et al, 2014). This enables the inclusion
of non-users, as in the case of the hybrid letterbox designed by the Berlin
Design Research Lab (Unteidig et al., 2014). Moreover, public WiFi nets can be
subject to various failures, intentional or not, and thus promote by design the
need for more face-to-face rather than virtual interactions (e.g., the
administrator of a local wireless access point can easily unplug it during an
organized face-to-face gathering).

These technical characteristics of wireless networks influence directly the
options available for granting citizens their rights to access and ownership of
the virtual space that overlays their cities, but they also provide the
appropriate environment for promoting the other two "qualitative" rights-those
of representation and participation. For example, the quantity and quality of
information exchanges, and the resulting representation of a collective
identity, can significantly benefit from the feelings of intimacy and
independence that local wireless networks offer, and from the possibility to
communicate anonymously.

Moreover, since by construction local wireless networks are meant to be
installed, customized, and maintained by local actors, they offer unlimited
capabilities for participatory design processes, which are subject to the
flexibility offered by the software, the technical competence of the
programmers, and the motivation of the local administrators and/or local
authorities (see also Horelli, 2013; Saad-Sulonen & Botero, 2010). The many
challenges that this shift of power to local actors generates (e.g., trust
issues, addressing network failures, etc.) can also be seen as opportunities
for community building and social learning. In this sense, community-based
wireless technology may be considered a first step in the democratization of
the local "institutional" platform through specific forms of representation as
well as through direct participation in collective actions.

DISCUSSION

Virtual layers of interactions that are anchored at a specific location create
a complex rhizome-like public space. In this space, moments of individual
isolation and social exchanges overlap in a variety of ways, within a process
of spatial appropriation. This makes it impossible to draw clear boundaries
between the private and the public, if considered in terms of spatial use.
Within a paradigm of more flexible boundaries between the public and the
private, in this research note we have introduced the following three ideas
that capture the dynamic transformation of urban space:

 1. The "right to the city" concept needs to be extended for the case of hybrid
    urban space in the digital age, where the special characteristics of
    wireless technology adds an interesting dimension.
 2. The hybrid sidewalk serves as a metaphor, and a target scenario for
    developing and offering to the general public technologies that can help
    address urban isolation and alienation without sacrificing privacy and
    independence.
 3. Wireless technology can play a critical role in building locally owned and
    participatory designed city networks that operate outside the public
    Internet, which can fulfil some important requirements of a hybrid sidewalk
    application.

Stemming from these three concepts the most challenging question to address in
the future is the extent to which one can imagine tangible possibilities, urban
interaction design fictions (Smyth & Helgason, 2013), and structure the
available design options at different levels so that the individual efforts by
local authorities, organizations, and individuals can generate shared knowledge
and improve the usability and customization options of the corresponding tools.
For this, the question of interdisciplinarity in the design of the hybrid urban
environment becomes urgent. Social scientists need to become more aware of the
capabilities of technology and they have to get involved in the design
processes, while engineers need to get in touch with legitimate local social
issues and their inherent complexity going beyond simple optimization
techniques and data analysis (see Antoniadis, Ott, & Passarella, 2014).

Moreover, the size and complexity of the design space calls for a bottom-up
design process consistent with the ideas developed in social learning
(Friedmann, 1987); participatory design (Schuler & Namioka, 1993); and action
research (Hearn et al., 2008) methodologies. At the same time, the development
of a "hybrid" pattern language, which could combine the original ideas of
Christopher Alexander (1979) with more recent approaches, ranging from
high-level meta concepts (Schuler, 2008) to micro design details in software
(Crumlish & Malone, 2009), might enhance the building of a new common language
that will not only facilitate communications between researchers from different
disciplines and practitioners, but also empower citizen-activists.

What is missing in our vision is not new ideas for applications, interfaces and
artefacts, but an innovation platform, a toolkit, that will enable citizens to
unleash their creativity and local knowledge toward building novel hybrid
spaces serving their own values and objectives. The research community can
contribute significantly by drawing attention and providing credibility to the
existing efforts of the FOSS communities around the world-and by sharing
knowledge and expertise as well as investing more in usability and integration
rather than in scientific novelty and differentiation. If successful, the
widespread use of a common toolkit, as the one we aim to build in the context
of the nethood.org project, will make conceivable the creation of an open data
repository, a massive collection of optionally shared, privacy preserving, and
localized, "small" instead of "big" data. This in turn can generate significant
scientific knowledge on ICT-mediated human behaviour that is currently
privately retained by companies, such as Facebook and Google.

We see this note as part of a wider effort to join forces in building a common
language of interdisciplinary studies around the design of DIY hybrid urban
space, and to create a global network of researchers and practitioners who do
not see technology as an end, but rather as a means to provide citizens with
rights to the hybrid city.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This work was partially supported by the EINS Network of Excellence in Internet
Science, FP7 grant 288021.

ENDNOTES

^1 http://superflux.in/work/yellowchair-stories
^2The latest survey by the Pew Research Center's Internet Project provides
interesting statistics on the use of location-based services, including the
so-called "geosocial services", in the US in the period 2011-2013: http://
www.pewinternet.org/2013/09/12/location-based-services/
^3 Note that de Waal & de Lange's definition of the concept of ownership is
inspired by Henri Lefebvre's distinction between the right to appropriation and
the right to property (Lefebvre, 1996). In our work, we would like to build on
this interpretation of ownership, and understand the theoretical and practical
implications of the fact that a local wireless network, and the digital
information hosted on it, can be actually owned by small organizations, groups,
even individuals. In other words, the "right to property" in the virtual space,
can be less difficult to grant, if compared to the case of contested physical
space. However, out of the practically unlimited parallel virtual spaces that
could overlay a specific location, only a few will be really "inhabited" in
practice: those that will manage to attract the most attention and a critical
mass of local users. Then big corporations will always have a competitive
advantage in terms of available resources and expertise, at least in places
where Internet is easily accessible. But wireless technology provides the
option for grassroots initiatives to peacefully propose their alternative,
potentially more inclusive, (hybrid) designs drawing on local knowledge and
their social, instead of commercial, objectives.
^4 See: http://www.socialstreet.it/international/info-english/
^5 See: http://oti.newamerica.net/blogposts/2013/
case_study_red_hook_initiative_wifi_tidepools-78575
^6 See: http://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/2011/01/
piratebox-an-artistic-provocation-in-lunchbox-form/

REFERENCES

Alexander, C. (1979). The timeless way of building. Oxford, UK: Oxford
University Press.
Antoniadis, P., et al. (2008). Community building over Neighborhood Wireless
Mesh Networks. IEEE Society & Technology, 27(1), 48-56.
Antoniadis, P., Ott, J., & Passarella, A. (2014). Do It Yourself networking: an
interdisciplinary approach (Dagstuhl Seminar 14042), Dagstuhl Reports, 4 (1),
125-151.
Antoniadis, P., Apostol, I, Unteidig, A., & Joost, G. (2014). CONTACT:
Facilitating Information Sharing Between Strangers Using Hyperlocal Community
Wireless Networks. UrbanIxD Symposium 2014, Venice, Italy.
Antoniadis, P. & Apostol, I. (2013). The Neighbourhood Game: from Behavioural
Economics to Urban Planning. In Proceedings of 1st International Conference on
Internet Science (pp. 153-162). Brussels: The FP7 European Network of
Excellence in Internet Science.
Apostol, I., Antoniadis, P., & Banerjee, T. (2013). Flanerie between Net and
Place: Promises and Possibilities for Participation in Planning. Journal of
Planning Education and Research, 33 (1), 20-33.
Baldwin, J. (2011). TidePools: Social WiFi, Parsons The New School for Design:
Master Thesis. Available at http://www.scribd.com/doc/94601219/
TidePools-Social-WiFi-Thesis.
Brenner, N., Marcuse, P., & Mayer, M. (eds.). (2012). Cities for People, Not
for Profit: Critical Urban Theory and the Right to the City. New Yirk:
Routledge.
Brenner, N. & Christian Schmid, C. (2011). Planetary Urbanisation. In M. Gandy
(Ed.), Urban Constellation (pp. 10-13). New York: Distributed Art Pub
Incorporated.
Castells, M. (2005). Space of Flows, Space of Places: Materials for a Theory of
Urbanism in the Information Age. In S. Bishwapriya (ed.), Comparative Planning
Cultures pp. 45-63). New York: Routledge.
de Certeau, M. (1984). Walking in the City. In Gieseking et al. (Eds). The
People, Place, and Space Reader. New York: Routledge.
de Cindio, F., & Schuler, D. (2012). Beyond Community Networks: From Local to
Global, from Participation to Deliberation. The Journal of Community
Informatics, 8(3).
Clemons, E. (2013). Online Profiling and Invasion of Privacy: The Myth of
Anonymization. The Huffington Post. Available online at http://
www.huffingtonpost.com/eric-k-clemons/internet-targeted-ads_b_2712586.html
Crawford, A. (2008). Taking Social Software to the Streets: Mobile Cocooning
and the (An-)Erotic City. Journal of Urban Technology, 15(3), 79-97.
Crumlish, C., & Malone, E. (2009). Designing Social Interfaces. Newton, MA:
O'Reilley Media, Inc.
Debord, G. (1996). Theory of the Dérive. In Libero Andreotti & Xavier Costa
(Eds.), Theory of the Dérive and other situationist writings on the city.
Barcelona: ACTAR.
Farman, J. (2012). Mobile Interface Theory: Embodied Space and Locative Media.
New York: Routledge.
Forlano, L. (2008). Anytime? Anywhere?: Reframing Debates Around Municipal
Wireless Networking , The Journal of Community Informatics, 4(1).
Foth, M. (Ed.). (2009). Handbook of Research on Urban Informatics: The Practice
and Promise of the Real-Time City. Hershey, PA: IGI Global.
Foth, M., Forlano, L., Satchell, C., & Gibbs, M. (Eds.). (2012). From Social
Butterfly to Engaged Citizen: Urban Informatics, Social Media, Ubiquitous
Computing, and Mobile Technology to Support Citizen Engagement. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Friedmann, J. (1987). Planning in the Public Domain: from Knowledge to Action.
Princeton NJ: Princeton University Press.
Friedmann, J. (1993). The right to the city. In M. Morse & J. Hardoy (Eds.),
Rethinking the Latin American city(pp. 135-151). Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
University Press.
Gaved, M., & Mulholland, P. (2008). Pioneers, subcultures, and cooperatives:
the grassroots augmentation of urban places. In A. Aurigi & F. De Cindio
(Eds.), Augmented urban spaces: articulating the physical and electronic city
(pp. 171-184). Surrey, UK: Ashgate.
Goffman, E. 2005 [1967]. Interaction Ritual: Essays in face-to-face behavior.
New Brunswick and London: AldineTransaction.
Gurstein, M. (Ed). (2010). Community informatics: enabling communities with
information and communication technologies. Hershey, PA: Idea Group.
Harvey, D. (2008). The right to the city. New Left Review, 53, 23-40.
Hearn, G., Tacchi, J., Foth, M., & Lennie, J. (2008). Action Research and New
Media: Concepts, Methods and Cases. New York: Hampton Press.
Horelli, L. (Ed.). (2013). New Approaches to Urban Planning: Insights from
Participatory Communities. Helsinki: Aalto University.
Houghton, K., Miller, I., & Foth, M. (2013). Appropriating Digital Technologies
for Urban Planning: Information and Communication Tools. New York: Routledge.
Jacobs, J. (1961). The Death and Life of Great American Cities. New York:
Random House.
Jungnickel, K. (2014). DIY WIFI: Re-imagining Connectivity. London, UK:
Palgrave Pivot.
de Lange, M., & de Waal, M., (2013). Owning the city: New media and citizen
engagement in urban design. First Monday, 18(11).
Lefebvre, H. (1991 [1974]). The Production of Space. Oxford, UK: Blackwell
Publishers.
Lefebvre, H. (1996 [1968]). The right to the city. In H. Lefebvre (auth), E.
Kofman & E. Lebas (Eds.), Writings on Cities (63-184). Cambridge, MA:
Blackwell.
Lefebvre, H. (2003 [1970]). The Urban Revolution. Minneapolis-St.Paul:
University of Minnesota Press.
Lynch, Kevin. (1960). The Image of the City. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Mansell, R. (2012). Imagining the Internet: Communication, Innovation, and
Governance. Oxford University Press.
Morozov, E. (2013). To Save Everything Click Here: The Folly of Technological
Solutionism. New York: Public Affairs.
van Oost, E., Verhaegh, S., & Oudshoorn, N. (2009). From Innovation Community
to Community Innovation User-initiated Innovation in Wireless Leiden. Science,
Technology, & Human Values, vol. 34 (2), 182-205.
Powell, A. (2011). Metaphors, Models and Communicative Spaces: Designing local
wireless infrastructure. Canadian Journal of Communication, 36(1).
Rainie, L., & Wellman, B. (2012). Networked: The New Social Operating System.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Saad-Sulonen, J. & Botero, A. (2010). The Urban Mediator as a tool for public
participation: a case of collaboration between designers and city planners. In
S. Wallin, L. Horelli and J. Saad-Sulonen (Eds.), Digital Tools in
Participatory Planning. Helsinki: Aalto University.
Sandvig, C. (2004). An initial assessment of cooperative action in wi-fi
networking. Telecommunications Policy, 28(7/8), 579-602.
Sansot, P. (2004). Poétique de la ville. Paris: Payot.
Schmid, C. (2012). Henri Lefebvre, the right to the city, and the new
metropolitan mainstream. In Brenner et al. (Eds.), Cities for people, not for
profit (pp. 42-62). New York: Routledge.
Schuler, D. & Namioka, A. (1993). Participatory design: Principles and
practices. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Schuler, D. (2008). Liberating Voices: A Pattern Language for Communication
Revolution. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Sennett, R. (1992 [1977]). (2nd ed.) The Fall of Public Man. NY: W.W. Norton &
Company.
Shirky, C. (2008). Here Comes Everybody: The Power of Organizing Without
Organizations. New York: Penguin Press.
Simmel, G. (1971 [1903]). The Stranger. In D. N. Levine (Ed.), On Individuality
and Social Forms (pp. 324-340). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Smyth, M. & Helgason, I. (2013). Tangible possibilities - envisioning
interactions in public space, Digital Creativity, 24 (1).
Stross, R. (2012). Meet Your Neighbors, if Only Online. The New York Times, May
13, 2012, page BU3 (New York edition). Available at http://www.nytimes.com/2012
/05/13/business/on-nextdoorcom-social-networks-for-neighbors.html?_r=0
Tufekci, Z. (2014). Engineering the public: Big data, surveillance, and
computational politics. First Monday, 19 (7).
Turkle, S. (1995). Life on the screen: Identity in the age of the Internet. New
York: Simon & Schuster.
Turkle, S. (2011). Alone Together: Why We Expect More from Technology and Less
from Each Other. New York: Basic Books.
Unteidig, A., Schubert, J., Sametinger, F., Joost, G., Reiter, L., & Sossa, J.
(2014). Hybrid Letterbox. Aveiro: Cumulus Conference.
Whyte, W. H. (1988). City: Rediscovering the Center, New York: Doubleday
Wilken, R. (2010). A Community of Strangers? Mobile Media, Art, Tactility and
Urban Encounters with the Other. Mobilities, 5(4), 449-478.
